# Capstone Seminar in Statistics (Statistics 485)

## Instructor

Kerby Shedden (kshedden@umich.edu, 277 West Hall)

Office hours: Monday 10-11:30 (starting 9/8), Thursday 3:30-5

## GSIs

- Jaylin Lowe (jaylincl@umich.edu): office hours Tuesday 1-4

- Abhiti Mishra (abhiti@umich.edu): office hours Tuesday 4-5:30, Wednesday 8:30-10

GSI office hours are held in Angell Hall, Room G219

## Overview

This is both an applied statistics and a technical communications course, and
is intended for students majoring in Statistics or Data Science. It satisfies
the LSA Upper Level Writing Requirement (ULWR).

The goals of the course are as follows:

- Provide experience conducting data analyses through case studies drawn from
  multiple domains.

- Provide multiple opportunities to write about statistical findings and
  receive feedback.

- Provide exposure to new statistical methods and theoretical concepts.

- Provide hands-on experience working with data and implementing analyses.

## Format:

The lectures will be balanced between informal discussion and more formal
presentations introducing new areas and unfamiliar ideas. Regular attendance
and participation is expected. This is an in-person seminar-style course and
lectures will not be recorded or streamed.

## Course materials

Course materials will be available through the course github site
[here](https://github.com/kshedden/case_studies). There is no textbook for
this course. Grades and announcements will use the course canvas site, and we
will have a [Piazza site](https://piazza.com/umich/fall2025/stats485001fa2025)
for discussion.

## Coursework

The coursework will entirely take the form of individual writing assignments
(memos). There will be approximately 8 writing assignments, one for each case
study. Each writing assignment will be 2-3 pages in length and will resemble a
memo prepared by a professional data analyst, summarizing methods and findings
from a data analysis.

Each writing assignment will address a writing prompt provided by the
instructor. You will have significant latitude in your approach, but the
analyses are not completely open-ended -- you should address the issues raised
in the writing prompt and in most cases you will be using methods discussed in
the lectures.

Writing for this course is relatively short and focused. The text component of
a report should generally be 2-3 pages in length, with 3 pages being a hard
limit. Two pages is usually sufficient but memos shorter than two pages are
usually underdeveloped and superficial. Graphs and tables do not count toward
the page limit, and you should only include a limited number of graphs and
tables that directly contribute to your main claims. Please place all graps
and tables at the end of your memo, number them, include a brief caption, and
when referring to them in the body of your memo you should always refer to
them by number (e.g. Figure 1 or Table 1).

This is first and foremost a statistics class. Your writing should be precise
and narrowly focused on the scientific and statistical aspects of your data
analysis. You are not writing for a general audience, you are writing for a
fellow expert who wants to learn specific findings from your analysis. Nearly
every sentence of your writing should convey such specific findings, or
document the methods used to obtain your findings.

There are no exams or quizzes in this course.

## Using Google docs

Writing assignments will be submitted using Google Docs. Please use your
University of Michigan user account when creating these files, and use default
fonts, margins, and line spacing. To facilitate grading, you must title each
document in the form “uniqname stats 485 assignment X”, where “uniqname” is
your UM login id and X=1, 2, ... is the assignment number. Share all your
assignments with the instructor and GSIs (but please do not send us an email
notification when you share the document). You should not edit any assignment
after the due date, note that all edits are tracked in Google Docs.
Instructors will provide feedback directly on your Google Doc. Do not remove
or unshare these documents until the course is complete and final grades have
been awarded.

You can use either _block style_ (blank lines between paragraphs with no
indentation), or _indented style_ (the first line of each paragraph is
indented). You must use one or the other of these, since otherwise it is
almost impossible to identify the paragraph boundaries.

Google docs catches nearly all spelling and grammatical errors, and also may
capture some very awkward language. You should almost always heed this advice.

## Case studies and datasets

The case studies will cover a variety of domains including human health,
social and behavioral science, natural science, and industry/commerce. We will
spend approximately three lectures discussing the background and relevant
statistical issues associated with each case study. After this context is
provided, you will be given a writing prompt and will have approximately 10
days to prepare your report. Extensions will be given only in extreme
situations and must be approved in advance of the deadline.

## Computing

Students should be competent in data manipulation and data analysis based on
skills learned in previous courses. Model code will be provided, but students
are expected to be resourceful in terms of data manipulation, writing and
debugging code, and implementing algorithms. Code is not submitted or graded
and you are free to use any computing environment and software that you like.
Model code will be provided in R, Python, and/or Julia.

Many of the datasets used in this course will be large. In addition to
statistical analyses, substantial data manipulations will be required.

## Collaboration and academic honesty

Every memo that you write for this class should reflect your own independent
understanding of the ideas that you are presenting and should reflect your own
human voice. Each student must complete their own analysis and writing, but
you may discuss analysis strategies and coding issues with other students.
Each student should develop and maintain their own code to conduct the
analysis in each project.

In the submitted writings, plagiarism from the instructor's lectures, course
materials, other students, or from any non-acknowledged source is a serious
violation of academic integrity and will result at minimum in a score of zero
on the assignment, and may also be referred to the LSA Honor Council.

You may use large language models to assist in your writing and you do not
need to acknowledge this. However LLMs are not trained on our course content
and will generally produce a generic and superficial analysis of the data that
is not reflective of the extended and highly focused discussions that we will
have in class. You need to develop your own understanding of the methods and
data that we study in this course, and you need to develop your own distinctly
human voice in writing about data analysis. I strongly suggest that you draft
each memo without using an LLM, and then if you wish, you can use the LLM to
polish the writing for clarity.

## Grading

Your course grade will be an unweighted average of scores received on all
assignments. Any assignment that you don't complete will receive a score of
zero. Each assignment will be scored according to the following rubric:

- Focus (25 points): Does the report primarily contain analysis and
  interpretation of results? Is the report focused on a single clearly-stated
  question? Is the analysis goal clearly and explicitly stated and motivated?

- Methods/approach (25 points): Is the analytic approach appropriate? Are
  analytic decisions justified based on established properties of the methods?
  Are all analysis methods adequately documented so that the analysis can be
  reproduced?

- Writing/organization (25 points): Is the writing well-organized and
  straightforward to read? Is statistical terminology used appropriately and
  defined where appropriate? Does the report have an informative title?

- Findings/interpretation (25 points): Does the analysis provide insight
  related to the primary motivating question? Are the conclusions stated
  explicitly and supported by the analysis and reported results?

## Some major themes of this course are:

- Formulating meaningful and tractable questions based on research goals and
  available data

- Devising, documenting, and implementing analysis strategies

- Communicating findings

- Leveraging knowledge of statistical foundations and theory when engaging in
  applied research

- Understanding the capabilities and limitations of statistical methods

- Understanding the value and limitations of different types of data

- Interpretation of analytic results

- Developing data manipulation and computing skills, especially for large and
  complex data sets

- Building knowledge about several applied research areas where data
  collection and analysis plays a major role

## Expectations for student writing

All statisticians must frequently communicate and document their findings in
written form. Writing about your analytic plans and research findings is an
excellent way to organize your thoughts, strengthen your arguments, and
identify weaknesses in your claims.

The memos written in this course reflect the type of writing routinely done by
data analysts in many business and academic settings. These are short, focused
writing assignments and are intended to document a data analysis. The writing
should be concise and rich in specific content. All of the writing should
focus on communicating specific scientific insights -- these are not essays
written for general audiences.

Your writing should focus on a specific question, and should exclusively
present analysis and findings that address that question. You generally should
provide one short paragraph motivating the research question, and this
motivating paragraph may be somewhat less technical than the remainder of the
memo. Apart from this brief introduction, your writing should exclusively
focus on analysis and findings.

For the writing assignments in this course, you should imagine that you are
writing a memo to be read by colleagues or collaborators. Your audience
consists of people familiar with the data and scientific or industrial context
behind the data, and who are also knowledgeable about statistics at your own
level.

Below are some guidelines for writing in this course. These are a few of the
most important things to keep in mind. We will expand on this a lot during the
semester.

- Write in an appropriate academic or business tone. Do not write casually,
  but also avoid excessively formal language.

- Organize your content so that your writing has a focused message, with each
  paragraph contributing a specific and distinct point to this message.

- Each report should focus on one primary question.

- Motivate your analytic approaches in terms of fundamental ideas from
  statistics.

- Use simple, direct language. Avoid convoluted expressions, hidden or
  needlessly subtle meanings, unusual vocabulary, and digressions that do not
  contribute to your main message.

- Express your arguments in as plain and simple terms as is practical. Do not
  write in a way that requires the reader to re-read your writing multiple
  times to understand your point. Favor short sentences in the active voice
  with one clause, and paragraphs that focus on one topic and that do not
  extend for more than 5-6 sentences.

- Write for an audience that may include non-native English speakers. Avoid
  colloquialisms and obscure cultural references or metaphors.

- You are expected to be able to write in grammatically-correct English. It is
  understood that there are many non-native English speakers in the course,
  and occasional minor grammatical issues will be overlooked.
